[Getting Started] Add reference app specification (#6820)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/getting-started/reference-application-specification.md

---
title: Specification for the reference application
linkTitle: Reference App Spec
description:
  This document contains the specification for the reference application that is
  used across the Getting Started guide
toc_hide: true
cspell:ignore: uninstrumented rolldice
---

The purpose of the reference application is to have a standardized sample
application that can be implemented in all languages for which an OpenTelemetry
SDK exists.

## General requirements

- Implementations of the Reference App are owned by language SIGs implementing

>   the OpenTelemetry APIs and SDKs.

Reviewer: HI @cijothomas ! The OTel End User SIG conducted a [survey](https://opentelemetry.io/blog/2024/otel-get-started-survey/) on the language popularity among other helpful insights about the getting started experience of the OTel users.

>   the OpenTelemetry APIs and SDKs.

Author: We can prioritize them and make it a goal to have them as early as possible. 

But eventually it comes down to the individuals who implement it :-)

- The application must run standing alone. In other words, it cannot take hard
  dependencies on any other content of the repository enclosing it.

## Service requirements

- The application must listen at port 8080 for HTTP requests by default. The
  port should be configurable via the environment variable APPLICATION_PORT.
- For handling the HTTP requests, a library should be used for which an
  instrumentation library is available. The application must provide the
  endpoint `/rolldice?rolls=<n>` via `GET` (and optionally `POST`) and return
  the following HTTP status codes and JSON results:

  - if `rolls` is not set or has a valid input (positive integer > 0): status
    code `200` and either a single number between 1 and 6 if `rolls` is not set
    or 1, or an array of `n` numbers between 1 and 6 where `n` is the value of
    `rolls`
  - if `rolls` is set to an invalid input (not a number): status code `400` and
    `{"status": "error", "message": "Parameter rolls must be a positive integer"}`
  - if `rolls` is set to a `0` or a negative integer: status code `500` and no
    JSON output.

- There may be an optional attribute `player=name` to the `/rolldice` endpoint,

>   where

Author: ah, yes, I was writing that and forgot about it... lol, let me fix that.

  - a WARN-level message for each HTTP request with a status code between `400`
    and `499`, including the message which will be sent in the JSON result
  - a ERROR-level message for each HTTP request with a status code above `499`
  - if the optional `player` attribute is set, a DEBUG-level message that outputs
    the value of `player` and the rolled number
  - if the optional `player` attribute is not set, a DEBUG-level message that outputs
    the static value `anonymous player` and the rolled number.
- The code of the application must be split into two files:
  - an `app` file that contains the handling of the HTTP requests

>   - a `lib` file that contains the implementation of the roll dice function.

Reviewer 2: Is this a hard requirement (`must` implies to me it is)? I get the argument for standardisation, but this is likely not idiomatic for a number of programming languages/frameworks (it's not for .NET/C#).

Reviewer 2: By not idiomatic I mean files called `app` and `lib`. This reads as if it's mandating the file names.

If I were to write a simple idiomatic .NET application today to do a simple `rolldice` endpoint, I could do it like this in a single `Program.cs` file:

```csharp
using System.Globalization;

var builder = WebApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

// Configure telemetry here, then...

var app = builder.Build();

app.MapGet("/rolldice/{player?}", (string? player, ILogger<Program> logger) =>
{
    var result = Random.Shared.Next(1, 7);

    if (string.IsNullOrEmpty(player))
    {
        logger.LogInformation("Anonymous player is rolling the dice: {result}", result);
    }
    else
    {
        logger.LogInformation("{player} is rolling the dice: {result}", player, result);
    }

    return result.ToString(CultureInfo.InvariantCulture);
});

app.Run();
```

This is essentially how we implemented `rolldice` in the .NET example in our [grafana/docker-otel-lgtm](https://github.com/grafana/docker-otel-lgtm/tree/main/examples/dotnet) repository.

If you still wanted the additional structure, then to be mostly-idiomatic you'd have something like this in .NET 6+:

```
- <App Directory>
|
|--> Program.cs - The entry-point to the application, needs to call and setup `App`.
|--> App.cs - The `App` class that sets up the webservice and defines the endpoints.
|--> Lib.cs - A weirdly-named (IMHO) class that provides the logic of the endpoint to roll the dice.
|--> Project.csproj - The project definition file.
```

With .NET 10, I could remove the need for the project file ([_Announcing dotnet run app.cs – A simpler way to start with C# and .NET 10](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/announcing-dotnet-run-app/_)) and at least change the name to `app.cs`, but I would still find `lib.cs` strange to find in a .NET project.

As the document is written right now, it seems overly-prescriptive to me. Rather, it would just talk about separating the HTTP handler code from the "business logic" as appropriate for the programming language/framework in question, rather than directing specific file names.

Reviewer 2: Cool, that basically fits with what I was getting at. I think the text as-written sounds like it's suggesting the files must be called that, rather than explaining what's wanted at a higher-level architectural/layout level.

Author: let me rewrite that, I also think I need to put more "why are we doing X" at certain points of the document

Author: fixed!

  described above. The outer function then does the following depending on the
  value of `rolls`:
  - `rolls == 1`: Run the inner function once and return the value.
  - `rolls > 1`: Run a loop which calls the inner function `rolls` time and
    return the results in an array.
- The inner function of `lib` is creating the random number between 1 and 6 and
  returns that value.

## Instrumentation requirements

- If possible, the initialization for the OpenTelemetry SDK should be contained
  in a separate file and imported within the "app" file. Otherwise, it should be
  part of the "app" file.
- Common resource detectors should be loaded in the initialization, e.g. for
  `process`, `container`, `os`, ...
- The "lib" file must depend only on the OpenTelemetry API.
- The `service.*` attributes should be added via environment variables
  (`OTEL_SERVICE_NAME`, `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES`).
- Other `resource detectors` should be added to the initialization of the SDK.
- For exporting telemetry the application should use an exporter for
  `stdout`/`console` and `otlp`.
- There should be an option to enable diagnostic logging for the OpenTelemetry

>   components, ideally via `OTEL_LOG_LEVEL`.

Reviewer 3: nit: not sure if `OTEL_LOG_LEVEL` is something that all languages support

Author: that's why I wrote "ideally" but I can add a "if supported"

---
title: Specification for the reference application
linkTitle: Reference App Spec
description:
  This document contains the specification for the reference application that is
  used across the Getting Started guide

> toc_hide: true

Reviewer 4: @svrnm - why hide this page from the sidenav? Is this page linked to anywhere else?

  - an INFO-level message for each HTTP request with a status code `<400`
  - a WARN-level message for each HTTP request with a status code between `400`
    and `499`, including the message which will be sent in the JSON result
  - a ERROR-level message for each HTTP request with a status code above `499`
  - if the optional `player` attribute is set, a DEBUG-level message that
    outputs the value of `player` and the rolled number
  - if the optional `player` attribute is not set, a DEBUG-level message that
    outputs the static value `anonymous player` and the rolled number. The log
    lines will be used to add a log bridge during instrumentation to demonstrate
    how OpenTelemetry can connect to existing logging frameworks.
- The code of the application must be split into two files:
  - an `app` file that contains the handling of the HTTP requests
  - a `library` file that contains the implementation of the roll dice function.
    The names of those files should be idiomatic within the implementing
    language, like `app.js` and `roll-the-dice.js`. The important point is that
    by separating the two, the code demonstrates that the `library` only takes

>     dependency on the API and all the SDK code is initalized in the `app` code.

Author: @martincostello @cijothomas is this better, I picked a `.js` example but if you provide me with what a good naming for .NET is, I can update that accordingly.

---
title: Specification for the reference application
linkTitle: Reference App Spec
description:
  This document contains the specification for the reference application that is
  used across the Getting Started guide
toc_hide: true
---

# General requirements

> - Implementations of the Reference App are owned by language SIGs implementing
>   the OpenTelemetry APIs & SDKs
> - There must be an uninstrumented and instrumented version of the application
> - There must be a language specific CI action, that verifies that the
>   application builds and runs in both versions
> - The application must be runnable from a commandline interface
> - There must be a Dockerfile to run the application within a containerized
>   environment
> - The application must run stand alone, i.e. it can not take hard dependencies
>   on any other content of the repository enclosing it

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Implementations of the Reference App are owned by language SIGs implementing
  the OpenTelemetry APIs and SDKs.
- There must be an uninstrumented and instrumented version of the application.
- There must be a language-specific CI action that verifies the
  application builds and runs in both versions.
- The application must be runnable from a command line interface.
- There must be a Dockerfile to run the application within a containerized
  environment.
- The application must run standing alone. In other words, it cannot take hard dependencies
  on any other content of the repository enclosing it.
```

## Service requirements

> - The application must listent at port 8080 for HTTP requests by default. The

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- The application must listen at port 8080 for HTTP requests by default. The
```

  port should be configurable via the environment variable APPLICATION_PORT.

> - For handling the HTTP requests a library should be used for which an

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- For handling the HTTP requests, a library should be used for which an
```

  instrumentation library is available. The application must provide the
  endpoint `/rolldice?rolls=<n>` via `GET` (and optionally `POST`) and return
  the following HTTP status codes and JSON results: - if `rolls` is not set or
  has a valid input (positive integer > 0): status code `200` and either a
  single number between 1 and 6 if `rolls` is not set or 1, or an array of `n`
  numbers between 1 and 6 where `n` is the value of `rolls` - if `rolls` is set
  to an invalid input (not a number): status code `400` and
  `{"status": "error", "message": "Parameter rolls must be a positive integer"}` -

>   if `rolls` is set to a negative integer: status code `500` and no JSON output.

Reviewer 6: Some indentation around the `-if ` bullet points might be helpful here for readability.

> - The application must output the following log lines using a language specific

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- The application must output the following log lines using a language-specific
```

  common logging framework:

>   - a INFO-level message for each HTTP request with a status code <400

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  - an INFO-level message for each HTTP request with a status code <400
```

  - a WARN-level message for each HTTP request with a status code between 400

>     and 400, including the message which will be sent in the JSON result

Reviewer 5: Should this say "between 400 and 499"?

  - a ERROR-level message for each HTTP request with a status code above 499
  - a DEBUG-level message for each dice roll containing the rolled number
- The code of the application must be split into two files:
  - an "app" file that contains the handling of the HTTP requests

>   - a "lib" file that contains the implementation of the roll dice function.

Reviewer 6: I don't think this will be the best approach for Ruby. The current rolldice app is written in Rails, and Rails has some very specific directory naming guidelines. A lib directory exists, but putting the roll dice function there would be a little odd.

Do you think the location of HTTP requests/roll dice function can be idiomatic for the language?

Author: The goal of splitting out the HTTP request piece and the "business logic" (roll the dice) is for demonstrating that a library does only need to take dependency on the API. So the goal is to split them, how those files are called and were they live does not matter. Would that work with ruby somehow?

Reviewer 6: Yes, that works!

## Instrumentation requirements

> - If possible the initialization for the OpenTelemetry SDK should be contained
>   in a separate file and imported within the "app" file. Otherwise it should be
>   part of the "app" file.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- If possible, the initialization for the OpenTelemetry SDK should be contained
  in a separate file and imported within the "app" file. Otherwise, it should be
  part of the "app" file.
```

> - The "lib" file must only depend on the OpenTelemetry API.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- The "lib" file must depend only on the OpenTelemetry API.
```

- The `service.*` attributes should be added via environment variables
  (`OTEL_SERVICE_NAME`, `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES`).

> - The exporters for all signals should be set via environment variables. At a

Reviewer 3: does all language support such environment variables?

Author: No they don't, yet I want to keep it that way for the following reasons:

* if we do not control exporters (and other configuration) via environment variables (and maybe later down with declarative configuration?) we add a layer of complexity that makes maintaining the code much harder, since instead of having 2 copies of the code (uinstrumentred, instrumented) we need 3 (uninstrumented, instrumented with console exporter, instrumented with otlp exporter). 
* I am hoping that we can trigger some development of those features for languages while we add more and more of them to the getting started. We will for sure start with only a few of them and then slowly add the other ones, and as needed discuss if we need to add something to the implementation to simplify the getting started flow.
* Last but not least, although I didn't write this in normative language, I picked "should" over "must" since eventually we need to be open for exceptions.

Reviewer 3: I am totally okay with using ENV variables for configuration - but exporter selection is not like any other variables - the package has to bundle all exporters with it, so that it can support exporter selection via env variable. This is quite different from using ENV variable for setting an endpoint etc.

> we need 3 (uninstrumented, instrumented with console exporter, instrumented with otlp exporter).

That is a reality, and in my observation, changing from stdout to otlp exporter is <5 lines of code + adding the right package!.

Author: I will drop this requirement for now, we have to see how far we get in practical terms and then later can reconsider

>   minimum a console output and OTLP export have to be supported that way.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  minimum, a console output and OTLP export must be supported that way.
```

- There should be an option to enable diagnostic logging for the OpenTelemetry
  components, ideally via `OTEL_LOG_LEVEL`.
- There should be a way to add the instrumentation library for the used HTTP

>   library. This instrumentation library should use the stable semantic

Reviewer 3: call out that both metrics and spans should be covered by the instrumentation library?

Author: that's a great addition, thanks!
